# Rhto-OxidativeStress
The use of cell factories to convert sugars from lignocellulosic biomass into chemicals in which oleochemicals and food additives, such as carotenoids, is essential for the shift towards sustainable processes. Rhodotorula toruloides is a yeast that naturally metabolises a wide range of substrates, including lignocellulosic hydrolysates, and converts them into lipids and carotenoids. In this study, xylose, the main component of hemicellulose, was used as the sole substrate for R. toruloides, and a detailed physiology characterisation combined with absolute proteomics and genome-scale metabolic models was carried out to understand the regulation of lipid and carotenoid production. To improve these productions, oxidative stress was induced by hydrogen peroxide and light irradiation and further enhanced by adaptive laboratory evolution. Based on the online measurements of growth and CO2 excretion, three distinct growth phases were identified during batch cultivations. Majority of the intracellular flux estimations showed similar trends with the measured protein levels and demonstrated improved NADPH regeneration, phosphoketolase activity and reduced beta-oxidation, correlating with increasing lipid yields. Light irradiation resulted in 70% higher carotenoid and 40% higher lipid content compared to the optimal growth conditions. The presence of hydrogen peroxide did not affect the carotenoid production but culminated in the highest lipid content of 0.65 g/gDCW. The adapted strain showed improved fitness and 2.3-fold higher carotenoid content than the parental strain. This work presents a holistic view of xylose conversion into microbial oil and carotenoids by R. toruloides, in a process towards renewable and cost-effective production of these molecules.

In this repository we uploaded:

- Rhto models with and without D-arabitol pathway. For all models, the biomass reaction was improved by adding carotenoids (β-carotene, γ-carotene, torulene and torularhodin).
- Experimental rates for the three phases (REF_P1, REF_P2, REF_P3) used to constrain models before performing the flux balance analysis.
- Random sampling simulations (raw and normalized fluxes)
- Absolute proteomics results for R. toruloides parental strain under the reference condition in all three growth phases (REF_ P1, P3, and PS) and light irradiation in phase 2   (LIG_P2); and for the R. toruloides the adapted strain under oxidative stress in phases 1 and 3 (ADA_P1, P3). Individual intensities for replicate experimentss (s1-s3) and     mean values for the measured conditions and mean absolute abundances (mg/g-protein) are provided.
- The reference file used for the gene enrichment analysis (g:Profiler; Raudvere et al., 2019) on GProfiler (https://biit.cs.ut.ee/gprofiler/gost)
